Good Application Guide

Good
Application
Guide.
This guide will help you prepare the
best application you can for Innovate
UK competitions.
| ktn-uk.org
01

Good Application Guide

Contents

Introduction

01

General Advice for Funding Applications

02

Key Features of a Good Application

03

01 Alignment to the competition scope

04

02 Innovation

05

03 Strong business case

06

04 Convincing value proposition

07

05 Credible R&D plan

10

06 Right consortium

11

07 Clear need for support

12

08 The right kind of risk

13

Top Tips for Grant Applications

14

Innovate UK application form - FAQ’s

15

Appendices

17

02

Good Application Guide

Introduction

This short guide aims to help you prepare the best
application you can for Innovate UK competitions by:

01

Highlighting what to include
in an application

02
Providing you with
03 our ‘Top 10 Tips’

Making clear what an
assessor is looking for

This guide has been produced by KTN to supplement the official
Innovate UK Guidance for Applicants (GfA). You should always read the
GfA and other Innovate UK documentation relating to the competition
to which you are applying. In addition to the content of this guide,
KTN can support you by providing independent, objective feedback
and advice on your application. Make sure you contact us in plenty of
time before the deadline to get the most from the support available.
Most of the Innovate UK funding programmes follow a similar
application format and you should bear in mind that the questions
are designed to help rather than trip you up. It is important that
you answer the questions asked and cover all aspects the GfA
describes. You should try to use the language they are looking for: the
easier you make it for the assessor to understand and check off the
information they seek, the more likely the proposal will score highly.
While the guide has been produced with Innovate UK programmes in
mind, the advice is transferable to most grant funding applications.

03

Good Application Guide

General Advice for Funding Applications

Keep in mind the priorities of the funding agency. What projects
are they looking for and what are their key investment criteria?
Avoid starting off by trying to explain how great your idea is or how
clever the technology is. The first part is about setting the context
for the market need and how it will be addressed - this must be laid
out in as compelling and logical a way as possible. Remember the
importance of a good first impression - those first few sentences
are critical so you need to make them interesting and exciting to
create positive momentum throughout the rest of the application.
In essence, there are four fundamental questions considered
by Innovate UK before making their investment decision:
01 Is it a big enough market? Does it represent value for
money compared to the investment requested?
02 Can the innovation be world leading? Is the
idea sufficiently distinctive and strong to be
successfully exploited in the UK and globally?
03 Is it at the right stage of development? It must be market
driven, rather than predominantly a research project
04 Why should public money be used? Why not use company funds
or raise additional finance via VC investment or a bank loan?

KTN Support
KTN is grant funded to provide independent, objective
feedback and advice on your application. If you are unsure
of anything or just want a friendly chat about how you
can improve your proposal then please get in touch.
enquiries@ktn-uk.org / www.ktn-uk.org / 03333 403 250

04

Good Application Guide

Key Features of a Good Application

This guidance is not structured to reflect the order of the questions
in the Innovate UK application form. It is more a summary of
what makes a good proposal than a list of the questions in
the application form. Always refer to the GfA for details of the
questions you need to answer in the application form.
Remember that each section on the application form has a list of
key information that should be supplied. A tip when checking an
application is to have someone else go through the application and
check that the text in each section covers the required topics.
A top-level summary can also be found towards the end of this guide.
The key features of a good proposal are:
01 Alignment to the competition scope
02 Innovation
03 strong business case
04 A convincing value proposition
05 A credible plan for Research and Development
06 The right consortium
07 A clear need for support
08 The right kind of risk
Above all, make sure you write an application
that excites and inspires!
The following content will go into more detail about
what you should include and how you should
focus your application. This guide complements
the GfA and should not be used in isolation.

05

Good Application Guide

01 Alignment to the competition scope

This may seem obvious but alignment to scope
is the most important thing to get right.
If the evaluators don’t think the project is in scope they
will reject it and it doesn’t matter how strong the rest
of the application is. Don’t waste a lot of time and effort
writing an application if you’re not sure that it’s a good fit.
Read the briefing document carefully and check with
the competition help desk if you are in any doubt
to make sure you are in scope before you start.
Once you’ve checked your project is in scope, think
carefully about the best way to present your case. Be very
clear and specific about how your project fits the scope
– don’t leave anything to guesswork by the evaluators.
Use clear language, refer to the terminology
used in the brief and keep it simple. Project
assessors are not necessarily experts in your
specific sector so you should avoid acronyms and
highly technical language where possible.

06

Good Application Guide

02 Innovation

Innovation should be at the heart of any Innovate UK application.
Innovation in this context is not about incremental improvements
but delivering step changes to sectors. That can mean developing
something completely new, or applying an existing technology
to a new sector. Innovations can be technical (pushing the
boundaries of a technology or applying it to a new problem)
or commercial (addressing a need in a novel way).
You also need to show that you have the freedom to operate in your
chosen sector and geographies. Evidence to support this can include
results of patent searches, literature surveys and competitor analyses.
Remember to describe the current IP situation and how will you protect
IP arising from the project. The Intellectual Property Office (IPO) has
useful resources for companies on protecting your IP: gov.uk/ipo
Make it clear to the assessor how your project improves on the nearest
current state-of-the art and use language to make the innovation easy
to identify. Without making wild,unsubstantiated claims, you need
to make sure that your idea is genuinely novel and that it doesn’t
come across as too incremental or inconsequential. Timeliness is an
important factor here; many exciting technologies don’t realise their
potential because the market isn’t ready for them, so make sure you
convince the assessors that this is the right time for this project.
Beyond the market as a whole, how will the project enhance
your offering and make you more competitive? What are the
outputs of the project and can the innovation can be enabling
and underpinning: i.e. does it have the potential to drive
improvements in multiple applications across a wide scope?

07

Good Application Guide

03 Strong business case

Above all, the assessor is looking to understand the need and
customer demand. What is the problem you are addressing? Is
it a credible business opportunity? The heart of your business
case must be focused on how you will make money from the idea,
placed in the context of the market opportunity and market size.
An ideal response explains why that market need exists (what is
driving it) and what is required to meet it before describing how it will
be addressed. This robust linkage between your proposed solution
and its commercial outcomes must be spelt out. Poor responses talk
too much about the solution without first describing the issue.
The assessor is looking to see whether you understand the
potential market for your project. The best responses use current
market data references (try to avoid wildly optimistic projections!)
and describe the wider picture before focusing on the market
share expected for your solution. The dynamics of the market
are also important. Is it growing? How fast? What trends affect
it? What is the competition? What are the barriers to entry?
Once this has been made clear, you must outline your strategy to
access the market. The assessor wants to see if this is realistic. If
you cannot explain how your product will be made,who will retail it,
or your sales/service model you will be marked down. You should
also be upfront about any legislation or regulatory issues, current
or forthcoming, that may affect your ability to access a market.
Don’t claim too much – the assessor knows what is possible and as far as
return on investment is concerned, wants to see if the investment of public
funding is value for money. Make sure your projections for growth and
market share are robust and on a realistic timescale. If you are proposing
a collaborative project this is an ideal opportunity to talk about the role of
each of the project partners. For example, having a downstream retailer or
a supplier in the project can really add weight to your exploitation plans.
Essentially, the detail you provide here supports your claims of
market capture and the assessor is trying to establish whether
it is likely to succeed. A badly defined market opportunity can
often come undone at this point, with the assessor wary that your
proposed project is more ‘technology push’ than ‘market pull’.

08

Good Application Guide

04 Convincing value proposition

It is a truism that people don’t buy technology; they buy what
technology does for them. The success of any innovation, therefore,
depends ultimately on human motivations and behaviour.
This reality can represent a risk for organisations seeking to exploit
innovative technologies, as even the most cutting-edge technology
will fail if potential customers see no benefit or are unable to use it
effectively. By taking its inspiration from human behaviour, design
not only mitigates that risk but leverages opportunities to create
more value through outstanding customer experiences.
Using high-quality design at the start of a project can help businesses to:
•

better understand their customers and end-users
and, in so doing, create more desirable and fit-forpurpose products, services and processes

•

develop more sustainable solutions and
increase business resilience

•

reduce innovation risk, timescales and cost

•

differentiate their offerings in competitive markets

•

identify and open up new markets

•

communicate ideas and collaborate more effectively

•

become more investor-ready

•

strengthen their brand – increasing awareness,
loyalty and advocacy among customers

For more help on how design led thinking can help your project,
please refer to the KTN Design in Innovation Guide.
By using design thinking to work on your value proposition before you
even think about writing your funding application is recommended. It can
help you refine your business case, exploitation plans and even inform
who you should collaborate with. There are lots of tools available online
to help, for example, the Value Proposition Canvas from Strategyzer.

09

Good Application Guide

Human/customer considerations are often lacking
from technology-enabled innovations leading to less
successful propositions so make sure you consider:
•

Who are your target customers or end users? Is
your product or service desirable in the context of
their specific motivations and aspirations?

•

Is it easy to adopt (i.e. is behaviour change required
and if so, how will you achieve this?)

•

Does it fulfil a genuine need?

•

Is it easy to use?

Do not underestimate the inertia barrier. Think about all the
technology that is currently available versus how much use is
made of it. It is often preferable to stick with the status quo even
if a better solution exists because it is a known pain versus an
unknown potential gain. Even a small amount of learning or behaviour
change can be a sufficient deterrent to new technology uptake.
A convincing value proposition should include benefits for all the
project partners as well as stakeholders outside the project. Be
sure to check the competition GfA for any specific criteria about
who should benefit from your project. The applications that do
well go beyond restating the commercial benefits of the idea,
and also emphasize the ways in which others might benefit.
Given that these are public funds, it is important to demonstrate
that the project will be helping more than just the proposer.
You must provide benefits in all categories and explain how
these can be achieved by your business strategy.
The key categories are:
•

Economic Benefits

•

Social Benefits

•

Environmental Benefits

•

Regional Benefits

10

Good Application Guide

Economic benefits: To your customers, your supply chains
and the broader sector – perhaps through exports, raised
visibility of the sector or competitiveness of the UK.
Social benefits: These can include regional benefits, in terms of
local employment and cluster growth; customer benefits in terms
of quality of life, education, empowerment etc; employee benefits
such as safer working environment, skill development etc.
Environmental benefits: This can cover emissions (to air, water
and ground), raw material consumption (including water), energy
efficiency, biodiversity, waste avoidance, recycling, or more
sustainable business models or consumer behaviour.
Regional benefits: These may include some of the economic, social and
environmental benefits where these have a regional bias. Will your project
help raise the profile of your region for a particular sector and deliver other,
knock-on benefits? Think big as well as small– from local to global impacts.
In all cases, don’t ignore the potential negative impacts. These should
be detailed and their mitigation/minimisation described or justified.
If the assessor judges that your project is potentially damaging, and
that you haven’t considered this, it will negatively impact your score.

Horizons Tool

Innovate UK has developed a practical tool that can help
develop your thinking around the different impacts and
benefits of your proposed product/service.
For more information and to get started, see the Horizons website.

11

Good Application Guide

05 Credible R&D plan

It is important to explain what you will do in the project – i.e. how you will
address the critical success factors described in your business opportunity.
The assessor wants to understand the technical approach and although
they tend to be knowledgeable in your sector, you should not assume
familiarity with all the technical aspects. Avoid jargon and acronyms
and break down the project into key work packages and milestones.
This suggested format is useful to ensure you include all
the relevant information clearly and concisely:
Work Package No. & Name,Partners involved, Timeline
(e.g. M0-12),Description of Activity, Milestone
The project is best summarised in a Gantt chart (included as an appendix)
with each task explained. Provide an appropriate level of detail – a handful of
tasks is too little, but breaking down every week is too much. The tasks should
be clear on resource allocation,cost and interdependency with other tasks.
This response shouldn’t be treated any differently to most internal
project plans. The assessor is looking to see if the plan is realistic,
whether there is sufficient resource (and where it is coming from)
and if management will be an issue. Make clear the reporting
lines,especially with multiple sub-contracts or partners.
The assessor is looking to see if the plan will achieve on the
project objectives and will have considerable project management
experience so make sure it is clear and all adds up!
A strong proposal clearly identifies what the exact scope, deliverables and
exploitations of the funded project will be as well as the longer term scope,
deliverables and exploitations beyond the funded element of the project.
The proposal you are writing is unlikely to take the project to the ultimate end
goal of product/service commercialisation but you will still talk about this in
terms of your market opportunity etc. Be clear what the project will deliver and
acknowledge the further steps required to achieve commercialisation. Strong
proposals include details about the immediate opportunity after completing
a successful project even if this to help get project approvals from a board
of directors or to help achieve getting further public/private investment for
detailed designs or proof-of-concept work. Doing this can also help strengthen
your risk analysis, for example, including risks around potential time to markets,
shifts/changes in business focus and/or markets and potential competitors.

12

Good Application Guide

05 Right consortium

It’s the old cliché, an A class team can make a B class product a
success but a B class team won’t necessarily succeed even with an
A class product. Your proposal is therefore as much about convincing
the assessor that you are the right team for the job as it is about
presenting a ground breaking innovation project. Whether you
are applying as a single company or a large consortium, it’s about
demonstrating that the project will proceed as described and will be
likely to deliver the intended outcomes after the project has ended.
Remember that route to market and exploitation are as important as
the product/service development aspects. Many projects fall down
on the route to market aspect and don’t demonstrate that they have
engaged likely customers or manufacturers. The assessor wants to
understand if the project partners have the skills, experience, resource
and facilities to carry out the project AND exploit the results themselves.
What does the perfect consortium look like? It’s a common
question but there is no magic formula for the ideal number
of partners in a successful project. It is all about what is right
for the particular project you are proposing. If you need 10
partners or 1 it doesn’t matter as long as you can justify it.
One aspect here is why a sub-contractor or partner has been
included – what value are they bringing, and is it core to the delivery
of the project? Make sure all partners have an active role and that
there are no “passengers” along for the journey. One part of this is
to demonstrate how each partner will benefit from the project. A
common issue we see is project partners included in the consortium
but not mentioned throughout the bulk of the proposal. If a partner is
actively involved they should be mentioned each step of the way - in
the benefits, in the technical approach, in the business case etc.

13

Good Application Guide

If you have gaps in your team, don’t ignore them and hope no one
notices. Be upfront about the gaps and explain your plan to fill them.
You should also include this within your risk mitigation strategy.
Remember to utilise the Appendix to provide additional details about your
partners. You get half an A4 page per partner in Innovate UK applications so
make sure you list the most relevant experience and evidence of success.

Need help finding collaborators?

KTN can help you identify and connect with the most appropriate
partners for your project. With over 60,000 members in our network
across industry, academia and intermediaries, together with our indepth sector knowledge, we are the UK’s innovation network.

14

Good Application Guide

07 Clear need for support

Essentially you are explaining why public money
should be used on your project.
Ideally by now you will have described such a compelling and
exciting project that you yourself will start to wonder why it even
needs public help! So, you need to explain why you can’t afford
it (perhaps your R&D budget is already committed elsewhere),
and then show why commercial finance isn’t available.
The kind of answer that assessors are looking for here usually relates
to risk: i.e. it is too risky for commercial investors; hence Innovate
UK funds could help to get through this stage of development.
Other important factors include: reducing the time to market in order
to get there ahead of competitors; to increase the amount of R&D
taking place in the UK, or to facilitate a new R&D collaboration.

15

Good Application Guide

08 The right kind of risk

The one thing to remember here is: risk is not a bad thing!
One of the most common mistakes we see in applications is an
understating of the risk in a project. The instinct for a company is
commonly to play down the risk and portray the project as a sure
thing in order to convince the assessors that it will succeed and
therefore must be supported. In fact rating the risks overall as low
will mark down your score – the question arises why you need
public support to de-risk the project if it is already low risk.
For a radically innovative project, risk is likely to be high and Innovate
UK appreciate this. Of course, there are different kinds of risk and
a “good” risk for a proposal might be technical risk i.e. you are not
sure if the technology will work. You mitigate this risk by having
a great team and the right resources i.e. if anyone can make it
work it will be you. “Bad” risks would include poor management,
a weak consortium, a poorly defined route to market etc.
Ensure you undertake a complete risk assessment across all the categories
listed. Many proposals ignore or give scant attention to commercial
and environmental risks and are marked down because of it. You must
describe mitigation strategies for each identified risk(and rate each one).
This is not about coming up with reasons for why this risk isn’t a problem,
but rather a strategy you will follow to minimize and control the risk.
Risk, Rating (High, Medium, Low), Impact, Mitigation
Best practice is to provide a table in the Appendix. For example:
Risk

Probability

Impact

Rating

Mitigation

Rating after
Mitigation

Owner

E.g.

1 - Low

1 - Low

E.g.

2 - Med

2 - Med

2 - Med

3 - High

3 - High

Consortium
agreement already in
place, regular project
meetings planned,
good network of
contacts, interest
from other parties.

1 - Low

Project
Partner
pulling out

Probability
x Impact

Project
Manager

1 - Low
2,4 - Med
3,6,9 - High

3 - High

Commercial risks may include losing partners/sub-contractors,
staff, changes in market or raw materials costs etc. Environmental
risks could include generation of new waste streams or
emissions, increased energy use or demand from users.
16

Good Application Guide

Top Tips for Grant Applications

01 Fit within scope
Make sure your project is within the remit for the competition
– details can be found in the Briefing Document
02 Agree key points with partners
Get started on your outline project plan and Consortium
Agreement as soon aspossible – who will do what
and who will own what when it comes to IP?
03 Be clear & concise
You don’t have much space so make every word
count and avoid overly technical language
04 Make a realistic plan
Remember if you get the funding you will have to do
the work so don’t write yourself into a corner
05 Be convincing
Why do you need the money? Ask yourself – would you invest?
06 Remember risk & innovation
Projects need sufficient quantities of both to
be eligible for Innovate UK funding
07 Quantify & justify assertions
Providecnumberscandcevidencecwherecp
ossiblectocback-upcyourcclaims
08 Excite & inspire
Stand out from the crowd and make sure your first few paragraphs
are particularly strong as that first impression counts.
09 Get advice & feedback from KTN
We are grant funded to support you – we can
provide independent, objective feedback and advice.
Contact us early to get the most value.
10 Don’t leave it too late to ask question or submit!
Remember that Innovate UK deadlines are strictly noon
but you can upload and overwrite your application as many
times as you like - only the last version will be evaluated.

17

Good Application Guide

Innovate UK application form - FAQ’s

Full details can be found in the GfA and on the Innovate UK website.
Here are the top-level questions you will need to
answer in your funding application:
01 Need or challenge
What is the business need, technological challenge
or market opportunity driving your innovation?
02 Approach and innovation
What approach will you take and where will
the for us of the innovation be?
03 Team and resources
Who is in the project team and what are their roles?
04 Appendix allowed – half page per partner
05 Market awareness
What does the market you are targeting look like?
06 Outcomes and route to market
How do you propose to grow your business and increase your
productivity into the long term as a result of the project?
07 Wider impacts
What impact might this project have outside the project team?
08 Project management
How will you manage the project effectively?
09 Appendix allowed – Gantt chart/project plan (up to 2 pages)
10 Risks
What are the main risks for this project?
11 Appendix allowed – Risk register (up to 2 pages)
12 Additionally
Describe the impact that an injection of public
funding would have on this project
13 Costs and value for money
How much will the project cost and how does
18

Good Application Guide

A note on Appendices

Make the most of the Appendices. When it says, “you may submit an
Appendix” it is strongly advised that you do so. Appendices shouldn’t
simply be longer responses to the application form questions, but
rather be used to provide graphic summaries and add value to the text.
Certainly you should avoid lots of back-up data or technical jargon.
Note the limits for Appendices – assessors are instructed not
to consider anything that goes beyond these so don’t waste
your time including additional content. You should also avoid
including website links or any referral for the assessors to read
more somewhere else as assessors are instructed not to click
links and only to assess based on the information provided.
Everything you need to convince the assessors should be
included directly in your application form. You should not
include vital information only in the appendices.
A final note is that there are recommendations about the names of
the appendices in the GfA – you should follow the instructions.

19

Good Application Guide

Need more help?

KTN is the UK’s innovation network.
We connect businesses, value chains,
entrepreneurs, innovator s and investors helping
you to identify and develop the ideas, expertise
and technologies, which have the potential to be
world beating products, processes and services.
We can help you apply for funding:
•

Advice on fit to competition scope

•

Finding collaboration partners Eligibility for awards

•

Competition availability

•

Objective feedback on draft applications

Contact us to find out more:
enquiries@ktn-uk.org
03333 403 250

20

Good Application Guide

KTN
Suite 218 Business Design Centre
52 Upper Street
Islington
London N1 0QH
Telephone: 03333 403251
Email: enquiries@ktn-uk.org
ktn-uk.org
@KTNUK
Knowledge Transfer Network Limited is
a company limited by guarantee.
Registered in England No 8705643.
Registered Address: Unit 218,
Business Design Centre
Upper Street, Islington, London N1 0QH.
21

